# Basic JavaScript-rendered Hello World

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/01.md`

### DOM

DOM is an object-oriented representaion of a web page. Without DOM, JavaScript,
or other languages don't have a model or notion of a web page, thus they can't
manipulate the web page. You can access the DOM directly in JavaScript from
within what is called a `script`, a program run by a browser. When you create a
script, whether inline in a `<script>` element or included in the web page, you
can immediately begin using the API for the `document` or `window` objects to
manipulate your web page.

The DOM is not part of the JavaScript language, but is instead a Web API used to
build websites. JavaScript can also be used in other contexts. For example,
Node.js runs JavaScript programs on a computer, but provides a different set of
APIs, and the DOM API is not a core part of the Node.js runtime.

### `<script>`

There's a `type` attribute that you can pass to `<script>`. If you don't use
this attribute, it indicates that the script is a "classic script", containing
JavaScript code. But if you use this attribute and set its value to `module`,
this value causes the code to be treated as a JavaScript module. The processing
of the script contents is deferred. The `charset` and `defer` attributes have no
effect. Unlike classic scripts, module scripts require the use of the CORS
protocol for cross-origin fetching.

In "classic script", the browser would have to load and evaluate scripts before
continuing to parse. But by using `type="module"` or other attributes such as
`defer` and `async`, these attributes allows the elimination of
**parser-blocking JavaScript**.

## Background

It doesn't take long to learn how to make "Hello World" appear on the page with
HTML:

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
  </body>
</html>
```

The browser takes this HTML code and generates
[the DOM (the Document Object Model)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
out of it. The browser then exposes the DOM to JavaScript so you can interact
with it to add a layer of interactivity to your web-page.

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
    <script type="module">
      // your JavaScript here
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Years ago, people were generating HTML on the server and then adding JavaScript
on top of that generated HTML for interactivity. However, as requirements for
that interactivity became more challenging, this approach produced applications
that were difficult to maintain and had performance issues.

So modern JavaScript frameworks were created to address some of the challenges
by programmatically creating the DOM rather than defining it in hand-written
HTML.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.html)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.html)

It's important to have a basic understanding of how to generate and interact
with DOM nodes using JavaScript because it will help you understand how React
works under the hood a little better. So in this exercise we're actually not
going to use React at all. Instead we're going to use JavaScript to create a
`div` DOM node with the text "Hello World" and insert that DOM node into the
document.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 generate the root node

[Production deploy](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.html)

Rather than having the `root` node in the HTML, see if you can create that one
using JavaScript as well.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=01%3A%20Basic%20JavaScript-rendered%20Hello%20World&em=).
